---
layout: page
title: L5 - Array of Sunshine
permalink: /l5/
objectives: >-
 <li>Arrays</li>
 <li>For-loops</li>
 <li>Random Numbers</li>
youtubeLink: https://www.youtube.com/embed/EsfS4Y622ic
nextLesson:  L6 - Getting Classy
nextHTML:  /l6/
codeSnippet: >-
  void minmax(int sz) {

      int array[sz];

      for (int i = 0; i < sz; i++){
          int temp = rand() % 1000 + 1;
          array[i] = temp;
      }

      int maxNum, minNum;
      maxNum = minNum = array[0];

      for (int i = 1; i < sz; i++){
          if(array[i] > maxNum){
              maxNum = array[i];
          } else if(array[i] < minNum) {
              minNum = array[i];
          }
      }

      cout << "max: " << maxNum << " min: " << minNum << endl;
  }
closer: >-
---
Today we focus on arrays, which are aggregates of a datatype.  What that means is that they are a collection or group of items of the same thing.  So instead of one variable, <code>int someNumber;</code> that can only hold a single value, we can have an array <code>int someNumbers[23];</code> that could hold for instance 23 separate integer values...or whatever size you choose to initialize it.  Know that the larger the number your array size is, the more memory is reserved for it.

Arrays are a very useful tool in programming as they allow you to iterate over (visit each, one-by-one) a large group of data and do something to each member of the array.  For instance, say we had an array of 700 employee salaries and wanted to see what each would look like after a 8% raise.  Arrays and loops make that super easy!

So to define an array, we simply write the datatype, name, and size of it Ex: <code>double salaries[700];</code>.  If you want to initialize your array with pre-determined numbers you would do so as such: <code>int tres[3] = {1, 2, 3}</code>.  If you were to initialize with fewer numbers than the array holds, the rest of the array members would be set to 0.  Ex: <code> int dos[2] = {1};</code> would have members of 1, 0.

When it comes to arrays, usually the biggest oddity for beginners is how to access members of an array. The culprit of this is zero-indexing.  What it means is that the first member of an array is at position 0, the second at position 1, third at position 2...and so on.  For example in our tres array from above, we have numbers in our array of [1, 2, 3].  To access the 1, we would say tres[0], 2 is at tres[1], and 3 at tres[2].  The reason for weirdness is because of where these numbers sit in memory on the computer.  tres+0, tres+1, tres+2 are where the array members 1, 2, 3 sit in memory.  The variable name 'tres' is a pointer in memory to where the array begins, and the index number is how far that member is from the beginning for the array.

<div class="embed-responsive embed-responsive-16by9 vid">
  <iframe class="embed-responsive-item" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/hwpiW5Qcl54" frameborder="0" allow="encrypted-media" allowfullscreen></iframe>
</div>

The for-loop is a nice tool for iterating some set of numbers.  It's defined in 3 parts.  The starting point, ending point, and how much to increase/decrease in between.  For example, you could iterate over an array of size 5 from from beginning to end <code>for(int i = 0; i < 5; i++) {...} </code> or that same array from end to beginning <code>for(int i = 4; i >= 0; i--) {...}</code> You could also increment or decrement by factors other than addition or subtraction <code> for(int i = 1; i < 100; i*2)) {...}</code> as an interesting example of doubling the iterator.
