---
layout: page
title: L6 - Getting Classy
permalink: /l6/
objectives: >-
 <li> Headers (programs with multiple files)</li>
 <li> Classes and class members</li>
 <li> Constructors </li>
 <li> Public and private specifiers </li>
youtubeLink: https://www.youtube.com/embed/G0mrkUMw_eI
nextLesson:  L7 - Insert Here
nextHTML:  /l3/
codeSnippet: >-
  string BankAcct::getCustomerName() {
      return customerName;
  }

  string BankAcct::getCustomerID(){
      return customerID;
  }
  double BankAcct::getBalance(){
      return balance;
  }
  void BankAcct::withdraw(double amount){
      balance -= amount;
  }
  void BankAcct::deposit(double amount) {
      balance += amount;
  }
closer: >-
---
Our focus here is on the basics of object-oriented programming and developing programs that span across multiple files.  Header files in C++ are for listing out all of your forward declarations and classes that you will use in your programs.  Only one .cpp file can 'point' to it (almost always the function/class definition .cpp file), or else multiple header files will be loaded into your final program creating conflicts.  This definition .cpp file will point to the header similarly to how it includes a library, like <code>#include "header.hpp"</code>, the difference being to include it in quotes instead of < ... > brackets.  Any additional .cpp files would point to this definitional .cpp file in the same way <code>#include "filePointingToHeader.cpp"</code>, which then points to the .hpp file.


<div class="embed-responsive embed-responsive-16by9 vid">
  <iframe class="embed-responsive-item" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/lVtv-C9cAWs" frameborder="0" allow="encrypted-media" allowfullscreen></iframe>
</div>

Classes are a way that we can build whatever we want, allowing us to build our own abstract datatypes and functions.  This is really where you can start building interesting things in C++.  Classes have public and private specifiers that say whether or not a class member variable/function can be accessed from outside of the class.  Only items under the public specifier can be accessed outside the class, where as private member items cannot.

<h2 class="section-heading">Code</h2>
<figure class="highlight">
  <code class="language-cpp" data-lang="cpp">
    <pre>
class BankAcct{
    private:
        string customerName;  // username
        string customerID;   // internal id
        double balance;  // money in acct

    public:
        BankAcct(std::string name, string id, double bal){
            customerName = name;
            customerID = id;
            balance = bal;
        }
        string bankName;
        string getCustomerName();
        string getCustomerID();
        double getBalance();
        void withdraw(double);
        void deposit(double);
};
    </pre>
  </code>
</figure>

Classes in C++ also allow you to easily construct a new instance of the class using a function() called a constructor.  For instance, in our <code>class BankAccount</code>, we were able to create a new BankAccount object simply by passing it the expected variables like <code> BankAccount temp("Name", "AcctNumber", 0);</code>.

<div class="embed-responsive embed-responsive-16by9 vid">
  <iframe class="embed-responsive-item" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/ces4foHMLM8" frameborder="0" allow="encrypted-media" allowfullscreen></iframe>
</div>

Object-oriented programming looks at everything as objects...as one might expect.  We create objects and then access their variables and functions through dot notation.  For example, if we made a class Animal, and instantiated a new cat <code>Animal myCat;</code>... We could give it a name using dot notation: <code>myCat.name = "fluffy";</code> or call it's name using the same notation <code> cout << myCat.name << endl; </code>.

 <a href="../../projectCode/bankAccount.zip" download>Download all code files</a>
