---
layout: page
title: L7 - Crossing Classes
permalink: /l7/
objectives: >-
 <li> Default Constructors</li>
 <li> Hidden this-></li>
 <li> Destructors </li>
 <li> Interacting between classes</li>
 <li> Intro to Pointers </li>
youtubeLink: https://www.youtube.com/embed/_UmFrLUXd_U
nextLesson:  L8 - Trains, Planes, and Recursion
nextHTML:  /l8/
codeSnippet: >-
  ~destructorExample(){

    for(int i = 0; i < someCounter; i++){
      delete someObject[i];
      someObject[i] = NULL;
    }
  }
closer: >-
---
The difference between a constructor and a default constructor, is whether you pass it arguments.  Default constructors are handy for when either you want all your objects to be exactly the same or you do not yet know what you want your object instance to look like, but you need one anyway.  The big advantage to using them is that you can fill it out with pre-defined data.  

When using a 'normal' constructor, where you pass it arguments, know that if you define your parameters exactly as you do the member variables of the class, then you will need to explicitly use the 'this->' pointer to signify which is in fact the member variable.  C++ likes you to be explicit!  Notice below when our parameters have a different name than the member variables, it is not necessary to use 'this->'.

<h2 class="section-heading">Code Example</h2>
<figure class="highlight">
  <code class="language-cpp" data-lang="cpp">
    <pre>
class BankAcct{
    private:
        string customerName;  // username
        string customerID;   // internal id
        double balance;  // money in acct

    public:
        //Different constructor parameter/member variable names
        BankAcct(string name, string id, double bal){
            customerName = name;
            customerID = id;
            balance = bal;
        }

        //Same constructor parameter/member variable names
        BankAcct(string customerName, string customerID, double balance){
            this->customerName = customerName;
            this->customerID = customerID;
            this->balance = balance;
        }
};
    </pre>
  </code>
</figure>

<div class="embed-responsive embed-responsive-16by9 vid">
  <iframe class="embed-responsive-item" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/vAxgq1lCU3A" frameborder="0" allow="encrypted-media" allowfullscreen></iframe>
</div>

Destructors are mainly used for cleaning up dynamic memory.  When you run a program that doesn't know before compiling how many of some certain object you will create, it needs the 'new' operator to create space in memory for these objects and 'delete' to free the space of these objects when you are done with them.  Destructors are fantastic tools for automatically cleaning up this memory.  They are signified with the tilde (~), see code below.

Class interactions are very common in C++.  Know that if you want class A to use a member of class B, then class A's .hpp file needs to #include class B's .hpp file in the header section.  Class A will only have access to class B's public functions, unless you make it a friend class.

 <a href="../../projectCode/l7.zip" download>Download all code files</a>
