---
layout: page
title: L8 - Trains, Planes, and Recursion
permalink: /l8/
objectives: >-
 <li> Recursive algorithms </li>
 <li> Recursion vs. Iteration </li>
 <li> The pros and cons of recursion </li>
youtubeLink: https://www.youtube.com/embed/PZCz0Y4XDD4
nextLesson:  L9 - Insert Here
nextHTML:  /l8/
codeSnippet: >-
  void printArray(int * arr, int sz){
    //Base case
    if(sz == 1){
      cout << arr[sz-1] << endl;
    }
    //Create a sub-problem and call recursively
    else {
      printArray(arr, sz-1);
      cout << arr[sz-1] << endl;
    }
  }
closer: >-
---
The idea of recursion is quite simple.  Imagine a function that calls itself, <a href="/l7/">like this one.</a>  Clever, right?  And that's primarily the reason you will find recursive functions, because they provide a clever, simple, elegant structure in performing some task.  

The key in designing recursive implementations is to first decide on a base case. This is where your function will stop, and then design the rest of your function to divide the problem up into sub-problems, and call itself on those sub-problems.  I find examples to be much easier in understanding recursion. Below is our simple factorial function.  A factorial is where a function multiplies itself by all the numbers less than it through 1.  Ex: 4! = 4 * 3 * 2 * 1 = 24.  Recursion is fantastic for problems like this.

<h2 class="section-heading">Code Example</h2>
<figure class="highlight">
  <code class="language-cpp" data-lang="cpp">
    <pre>
    int factorial(int n){
      //Base case
      if (n <= 1) {
        return 1;
      }
      //Sub-problem, calling itself
      else {
        return n * factorial(n-1);
      }

    }
    </pre>
  </code>
</figure>

Notice how the problem will continue subdividing itself until it reaches the base case.  This base case is essential or else the function would continue on forever.  Once reaching the base case the function begins to 'unwind,' returning to itself the answer of each call until getting back to the original number passed. If you're curious, of how it's unwinding, try adding a print statement for n after the else statement.

<div class="embed-responsive embed-responsive-16by9 vid">
  <iframe class="embed-responsive-item" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/wOMh9KTAAZY" frameborder="0" allow="encrypted-media" allowfullscreen></iframe>
</div>

Iterative functions can most often be converted to recursive implementations as well, however that doesn't mean that they are better.  With the elegance and simplicity of code, recursion often comes with the cost of efficiency both in time and space.  In some not so extreme cases your function can lead to stack overflow where your computer allocates such a large amount of memory for the recursive calls that it crashes your program.  Recursion can often be found in search or sort algorithms.
