---
layout: page2
title: L10 - Tic-Tac-Toe
permalink: /l10/
objectives: >-
 <li> Ternary conditionals </li>
 <li> 2-D Arrays </li>
 <li> Enums </li>
 <li> Making more things! </li>
youtubeLink: https://www.youtube.com/embed/DP7jsvKm3_w
closer: >-
---
In this lesson our code contains many ternary conditionals.  Ternary conditionals sound quite foreign and sophisticated but really they are just a simple if statement when you want to return between only two choices (ideally 2...you could use them with more, but 2 is their intended).  It's easier to show than tell in this situation.  Imagine you have some code:

<figure class="highlight">
  <code class="language-cpp" data-lang="cpp">
    <pre>

    if(a > 10) {
      b = "Big number";
    } else {
      b = "Little number";
    }
    </pre>
  </code>
</figure>

The ternary conditional allows you to assign this more concisely. The structure of it is: <code> (if stmt) ? something : somethingElse; </code>  If the if statement is true, the first item will be returned, otherwise, the second statement will be returned.  Easy peasy, with very little code.  So rewriting our above code we would have:

<figure class="highlight">
  <code class="language-cpp" data-lang="cpp">
    <pre>

    b = (a > 10) ? "Big number" : "Little number";
    </pre>
  </code>
</figure>

Next we need to talk about 2D arrays (matrices).  In our lesson example we use a 3x3 array as our Tic-Tac-Toe game board for placing our X's and O's.  There is nothing too peculiar about 2D arrays.  They are assigned like <code>int array[4][6];</code> where the first number is the number of rows contained, and second the number of columns contained.  To access an entry in this matrix (2D array) you only need to select it's position.  For instance if you wanted to access the very top left item you would access it by <code>array[0][0];</code>.

That leaves us with the enum type.  Enum is short for enumeration and it looks similar to when you'd initialize an array.  Here is an enum for days of the week:

<figure class="highlight">
  <code class="language-cpp" data-lang="cpp">
    <pre>

    enum WeekDays = { Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday, Friday};
    </pre>
  </code>
</figure>

Each day is initialized with the number representing it's position in the enum.  So Monday = 0, Tuesday = 1, Wednesday = 2, etc.  Enums are great ways for making decisions on data, since it will convert whatever you put in there (day of the week) to an enumerated integer.  You will see them often when returning errors.  Think of when iTunes last crashed on you and you got an -ERROR1004, returning that 1004, could be the position of a certain error code in an enum full of error codes.  


 <a href="../../projectCode/tic-tac-toe.zip" download>Download all code files</a>

<div class="embed-responsive embed-responsive-16by9 vid">
  <iframe class="embed-responsive-item" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/GYRf-CwEwno" frameborder="0" allow="encrypted-media" allowfullscreen></iframe>
</div>
